Farming
The spread of farming and early domestication of plants and animals was extensive, as the practices expanded from three specific regions (7000 BC) of the world to various other regions, spreading to five continents by the year 3000 BC. Agriculture first started in the Middle East around 10,000-9500 BC. By 7000 BC it had spread to the western part of the Indian subcontinent, and by 6000 BC, agriculture spread to Egypt. By 5000 BC, it had reached China, and around 2700 BC, corn was being farmed in Mesoamerica. The Middle East, covering the areas of modern day Turkey, Iraq, Palestine, and Israel, had domesticated cattle and pigs. They were also successful in the domestication and farming of several crops and plants like wheat, barley, rye, onions, peas, and grapes. The Mesoamericans had begun farming corn, beans, avocados, squash, pumpkins, and cotton. They had not domesticated any animals. In the Andes region (Peru), potatoes, tomatoes, lima beans, peanuts, and sweet potatoes were farmed. The Andeans had also domesticated the llama. The spread in the Middle East had the greatest expansion in terms of area. Sheep were domesticated in the greater Middle East; goats were originally domesticated in Central Europe, olives in the Mediterranean. Cotton was first farmed in the Indian sub-continent, and hemp, camels, and buckwheat were originally domesticated west of the Caspian Sea. Furthermore, in the Americas, the Mesoamericans expanded north and south, spreading farming and herding to Central and slightly further into North America. From where the practice extended to South America. The Andeans had minimum spread, expanding farming and herding to regions immediately around theirs. The farming and domestication of plants and animals, by 3000 BC, had been independently innovated in Southeast Asia, China, and North-central Africa. In Southeast Asia, rice, citrus, and chickens were originally farmed and domesticated. The farming of millet and soybean was practiced in China. Sorghum and coffee were farmed originally in North-central Africa. In a brief period of 4000 years, humans had farmed and domesticated over thirty plants and animals. The spread of farming and herding had reached over five continents, and ten regions of the world
 
When people think of the Neolithic era, they often think of Stonehenge, the iconic image
of this early era. Dating to approximately 3000 B.C.E. and set on Salisbury Plain in 
England, it is a structure larger and more complex than anything built before it in Europe. 
Stonehenge is an example of the cultural advances brought about by the Neolithic 
revolution—the most important development in human history. The way we live today, 
settled in homes, close to other people in towns and cities, protected by laws, eating 
food grown on farms, and with leisure time to learn, explore and invent is all a result 
of the Neolithic revolution, which occurred approximately 11,500-5,000 years ago. The 
revolution which led to our way of life was the development of the technology needed 
to plant and harvest crops and to domesticate animals.
 
Before the Neolithic revolution, it's likely you would have lived with your extended family
as a nomad, never staying anywhere for more than a few months, always living in 
temporary shelters, always searching for food and never owning anything you couldn’t 
easily pack in a pocket or a sack. The change to the Neolithic way of life was huge and 
led to many of the pleasures (lots of food, friends and a comfortable home) that we 
still enjoy today.

Stonehenge, c. 3,000 B.C.E., Salisbury Plain, England

Neolithic Art
The massive changes in the way people lived also changed the types of art they made.
Neolithic sculpture became bigger, in part, because people didn’t have to carry it
around anymore; pottery became more widespread and was used to store food harvested 
from farms. This is when alcohol was invented and when architecture, and its interior 
and exterior decoration, first appears. In short, people settle down and begin to live in 
one place, year after year.

It seems very unlikely that Stonehenge could have been made by earlier, Paleolithic, 
nomads. It would have been a waste to invest so much time and energy building a 
monument in a place to which they might never return or might only return
infrequently. The use or meaning of Stonehenge is not clear, but
the design, planning and execution could have only been carried out by a culture in which 
authority was unquestioned. Here is a culture that was able to rally hundreds of people to 
perform very hard work for extended periods of time. This is another characteristic of the 
Neolithic era.

Skulls with plaster and shell from the Pre-Pottery Neolithic B, 6,000-7,000 B.C.E., 
found at the Yiftah'el archeological site in the Lower Galilee, Israel

Plastered Skulls
The Neolithic period is also important because it is when we first find good evidence
for religious practice, a perpetual inspiration for the fine arts. Perhaps most fascinating
are the plaster skulls found around the area of the Levant, at six sites, including Jericho 
in Israel. At this time in the Neolithic, c. 7000-6,000 B.C.E., people were often buried 
under the floors of homes, and in some cases their skulls were removed and covered 
with plaster in order to create very life-like faces, complete with shells inset for eyes 
and paint to imitate hair and moustaches.

The traditional interpretation of these the skulls has been that they offered a means of
preserving and worshiping male ancestors. However, recent research has shown that
among the sixty-one plastered skulls that have been found, there is a generous number
that come from the bodies of women and children. Perhaps the skulls are not so much
religious objects but rather powerful images made to aid in mourning lost loved ones. 
Neolithic peoples didn't have written language, so we may never know.1

1 The earliest example of writing develops in Sumer in Mesopotamia in the late 4th 
millennium B.C.E. However, there are scholars that believe that earlier proto-writing 
developed during the Neolithic period.
